What are Nutrients?
The foods we eat contain nutrients. Nutrients are substances required by the body to
perform its basic functions. Nutrients must be obtained from our diet, since the human
body does not synthesise or produce them. Nutrients have one or more of three basic
functions: they provide energy, contribute to body structure, and/or regulate chemical
processes in the body. These basic functions allow us to detect and respond to
environmental surroundings, move, excrete wastes, respire (breathe), grow, and
reproduce. There are six classes of nutrients required for the body to function and
maintain overall health. These are carbohydrates, lipids, proteins, water, vitamins, and
minerals. Foods also contain non-nutrients that may be harmful (such as natural toxins
common in plant foods and additives like some dyes and preservatives) or beneficial
(such as antioxidants).

Macronutrients
Nutrients that are needed in large amounts are called macronutrients. There are three
classes of macronutrients: carbohydrates, lipids, and proteins. These can be
metabolically processed into cellular energy. The energy from macronutrients comes
from their chemical bonds. This chemical energy is converted into cellular energy that is
then utilized to perform work, allowing our bodies to conduct their basic functions. A unit
of the measurement of food energy is the calorie. On nutrition food labels the amount
given for “calories” is actually equivalent to each calorie multiplied by one thousand. A
kilocalorie (one thousand calories, denoted with a small “c”) is synonymous with the
“Calorie” (with a capital “C”) on nutrition food labels. Water is also a macronutrient in the
sense that you require a large amount of it, but unlike the other macronutrients, it does
not yield calories.

Carbohydrates
Carbohydrates are molecules composed of carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen. The major
food sources of carbohydrates are grains, milk, fruits, and starchy vegetables, like
potatoes. Non-starchy vegetables also contain carbohydrates, but in lesser quantities.
Carbohydrates
are broadly classified into two forms based on their chemical structure: simple
carbohydrates, often called simple sugars; and complex carbohydrates.
Simple carbohydrates consist of one or two basic units. Examples of simple sugars
include sucrose, the type of sugar you would have in a bowl on the breakfast table, and

glucose, the type of sugar that circulates in your blood. Complex carbohydrates are long
chains of simple sugars that can be unbranched or branched. During digestion, the
body breaks down digestible complex carbohydrates to simple sugars, mostly glucose.
Glucose is then transported to all our cells where it is stored, used to make energy, or
used to build macromolecules. Fiber is also a complex carbohydrate, but it cannot be
broken down by digestive enzymes in the human intestine. As a result, it passes
through the digestive tract undigested unless the bacteria that inhabit the colon or large
intestine break it down. One gram of digestible carbohydrates yields four kilocalories of
energy for the cells in the body to perform work. In addition to providing energy and
serving as building blocks for bigger macromolecules, carbohydrates are essential for
proper functioning of the nervous system, heart, and kidneys. As mentioned, glucose
can be stored in the body for future use. In humans, the storage molecule of
carbohydrates is called glycogen, and in plants, it is known as starch. Glycogen and
starch are complex carbohydrates.

Lipids
Lipids are also a family of molecules composed of carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen, but
unlike carbohydrates, they are insoluble in water. Lipids are found predominantly in
butter, oils, meats, dairy products, nuts, and seeds, and in many processed foods. The
three main types of lipids are triglycerides (triacylglycerols), phospholipids, and sterols.
The main job of lipids is to provide or store energy. Lipids provide more energy per gram
than carbohydrates (nine kilocalories per gram of lipids versus four kilocalories per gram
of carbohydrates). In addition to energy storage, lipids serve as a major component of
cell membranes, surround and protect organs (in fat-storing tissues), provide insulation
to aid in temperature regulation, and regulate many other functions in the body.

Proteins
Proteins are macromolecules composed of chains of subunits called amino acids.
Amino acids are simple subunits composed of carbon, oxygen, hydrogen, and nitrogen.
Food sources of proteins include meats, dairy products, seafood, and a variety of
different plant- based foods, most notably soy. The word protein comes from a Greek
word meaning “of primary importance,” which is an apt description of these
macronutrients; they are also known colloquially as the “workhorses” of life. Proteins
provide four kilocalories of energy per gram; however providing energy is not protein’s
most important function. Proteins provide structure to bones, muscles and skin, and

play a role in conducting most of the chemical reactions that take place in the body.
Scientists estimate that greater than one-hundred thousand different proteins exist
within the human body. The genetic codes in DNA are basically protein recipes that
determine the order in which 20 different amino acids are bound together to make
thousands of specific proteins.

Water
There is one other nutrient that we must have in large quantities: water. Water does not
contain carbon, but is composed of two hydrogens and one oxygen per molecule of
water. More than 60 percent of your total body weight is water. Without it, nothing could
be transported in or out of the body, chemical reactions would not occur, organs would
not be cushioned, and body temperature would fluctuate widely. On average, an adult
consumes just over two liters of water per day from food and drink combined. Since
water is so critical for life’s basic processes, the amount of water input and output is
supremely important, a topic we will explore in detail in

Micronutrients
Micronutrients are nutrients required by the body in lesser amounts, but are still
essential for carrying out bodily functions. Micronutrients include all the essential
minerals and vitamins. There are sixteen essential minerals and thirteen vitamins ( In
contrast to carbohydrates, lipids, and proteins, micronutrients are not sources of energy
(calories), but they assist in the process as cofactors or components of enzymes
(i.e.coenzymes). Enzymes are proteins that catalyze chemical reactions in the body and
are involved in all aspects of body functions from producing energy, to digesting
nutrients, to building macromolecules. Micronutrients play many essential roles in the
body.

